---
title: Service and feature releases
---

Before general availability, the lifecycle of new services and features
includes a limited availability (private beta) stage and an early
availability (public beta) stage.

## Limited availability (private beta)

The limited availability (private beta) stage is an initial release of a
new functionality that you can try out by invitation only. If you are
interested in trying a service or feature in this stage, contact the
[sales team](mailto:sales@aiven.io).

## Early availability (public beta)

Features and services in the early availability (public beta) stage are
released to all users with some restrictions on the functionality and
[service level agreement](https://aiven.io/sla). They are intended for
use in non-production environments, but you can test them with
production-like workloads to gauge their behavior under heavy loads.
Issues raised for these services and features are considered [low
severity](https://aiven.io/support-services).

You can enable most early availability (public beta) features yourself
on the
[feature preview page](/docs/platform/howto/feature-preview) in the user profile. This is also where you can provide
feedback about the feature after trying it out.

Using a service in this stage means that you consent to us contacting
you to request qualitative feedback. The feedback we receive helps us
shape the products you use.

## General availability

New services and features become generally available once they are ready
for production use at scale. The duration of the early and limited
availability stages depends on how quickly the service or feature has
been adopted by the users and what changes are required to address the
key issues that are discovered.

## Billing for limited and early availability services

Aiven provides credits for you to try out limited and early availability
services. Once the credit code expires or you have used all of the
credits, you are charged for the service according to the normal rate.

## Feature roadmap

[Aiven Ideas](https://ideas.aiven.io/) is a portal for users to submit,
vote on, and discuss your ideas to shape the future of the product.
It\'s also where you can view the status and progress of each feature on
the roadmap.
